# CS 449 - Computer Human Interaction Final Exam Review

## What are the 6 steps of user-centered design?

---

## What is the difference between UI and UX?

---

## Is it possible to have a good UX but bad UI?

---

## What are the ethical considerations when conducting human subject experiments (ORE tutorial)?

---

## What is the difference between user groups and personas?

### How are they used?

---

## What is empathy map?

---

## What is exploratory study?

---

## What are the benefits of quantitative and qualitative data?

---

## What are considered good/bad interview questions and why?

---

## What is a "walkthrough" question in an interview?

### What is it useful for?

---

## What habits should we avoid when interviewing?

---

## What is the different between controlled and naturalistic observation?

---

## When would we want to do observation versus interview?

---

## What is the difference between direct and participant observation?

---

## What is the process of conducting an observational study?

### How do you choose a venue?

### What data can be collected and how do we analyze observation data?

### What are the ethical considerations?

---

## What are Flow, Sequence, Cultural, Artifact, and Physical models?

---

## What are user stories?

---

## What kinds of information do storyboards contain?

### What are storyboards for?

---

## What is the difference between sketches and wireframes?

---

## What is information architecture?

---

## What is the difference between site flows and user flows?

---

## What is the difference between prototype and wireframe?

---

## What is the difference between low-fidelity and high-fidelity prototype?

---

## What is a Wizard-of-Oz study?

---

## What are the benefits of paper prototyping?

---

## What is a 5 second test?

### What kind of things can you test with 5 second test?

---

## What is Von Restoff effect?

---

## What are Gestalt principles and how are they used in interface design?

---

## What is the implication of central vs peripheral vision for design?

---

## What are some ways you can evaluate paper prototype?

---

## What are some gameful design heuristics and how would you apply them to make an application more engaging?

---

## What is a "Curb Cut" phenomenon?

---

## What is the difference between universal and ability-based design?

---

## What is the difference between a lab study and a field study?

# Even More Study Questions

## Review 1

A common problem for many people is that they forget whether
they have locked their door after leaving the house. It is not just
their door. Sometimes, they forget whether they have shut off the
water before leaving for Christmas holidays, whether they have
turn off the stove after cooking. You are an usability expert
consulting for a house insurance company called HouseSafe, who
wants to create a new app called "Forget Me Not" to help their
clients keep track of things that they are anxious about forgetting.

**Question**  

1. The company wants you to jump straight into programming.
Describe to the company the 6 steps of the user-centered design
cycle and potential problems that may arise when a particular part
of the process is skipped.

## Review 2

The company sent you a persona to help ground your design:  
"The persona, Jody, is a 60 year old woman who lives alone. She
always boils water in a kettle for tea in the morning, but frequently
forgets to turn off the stove afterwards."

**Questions**

1. Is this a good persona description? Why or why not?
2. Define persona. How is persona different from user group? What are personas useful for? 
3. What information do empathy maps capture? How are they different from personas? 

## Review 3

As part of the exploratory study, you interviewed Bob:

> You: My first question is — It is typical that the older you get, the more forget you
> become. Do you consider yourself a forgetful person?
>
> Bob: I don’t think so… I mean… maybe …
>
> You: Ok, let me rephrase the question. Do you agree or disagree with the following
> statement: "I often forget whether I have turned off the stove and locked the door."
>
> Bob: I think I agree…
>
> You: OK, great!! If the app can automatically learn at what time you engage in certain
> types of activities, like boiling water, how much do you think you will like this feature?
>
> Bob: …

**Questions**

1. What is an exploratory study? Why is it an important first step in User Centered Design?
2. Describe all the mistakes you find in the interview and how you would fix these mistakes.
3. What is a "walkthrough" in an interview and how is it useful here?

## Review 4

In addition to the interview, you also want to collect some
quantitative data to inform your design of the "Forget Me Not"
app.

**Questions**

1. Give 3 examples of quantitative data you could collect from your target users. 
2. What is the difference between quantitative and qualitative data? What benefits do they each provide?

## Review 5

You conducted an observation where you followed one of the
target users around for the day, and counted how many times she
checks and re-checks her stove. You also talked to the participant
throughout the day to understand her thought process and why
she is anxious about forgetting certain things.

**Questions**

1. What type of observation is this?
    * controlled or naturalistic?
    * non-participatory, passive participation, active participation, or complete participation?
    * direct observation or participant observation?
2. Why might we want to do observations instead of interviews?
3. You plan to create an affinity diagram to summarize the observation data. Describe the kinds of information that the affinity diagram should capture.

## Review 6

After conducting observational studies with multiple target users,
you notice that besides personal characteristics, many things can
affect whether someone forgets an important task. For example,
whether someone forgets to lock the door can depend on whether
the keys are visible and close by as he/she is leaving the house,
whether there is distraction (e.g., kids screaming for attention),
whether he/she is in a rush, and whether there is someone else
(e.g., spouse) that he/she depends on for remembering.

**Questions**

1. Name the work model that is the most appropriate here and explain why. Draw the work model containing the information provided above.
2. What are work models? What are their main purpose?
3. What are the 5 work models that we discussed in class? How are they different from each other?
4. What are consolidated work models?

## Review 7

After the exploratory study, it is time to design the functionalities of
the app.

**Questions**

1. Give 2 examples of _user story_ in the correct format.
2. What is the difference between a user story and a storyboard, in terms of the information that they contain?

## Review 8

As the final step of the process, you are iterating on your design
using both a low fidelity and high fidelity prototype. There are a lot
of evaluation techniques you can choose from, including:

* Wizard of Oz study
* Heuristic Evaluation
* Cognitive Walkthrough
* 5 Seconds Test
* Tree Testing
* A/B Testing
* Click Testing
* Keystroke Level modeling
* Eye tracking
* Focus Group

**Questions**

What technique would you use for the following scenario and why?

1. To see whether users can find the "settings"
2. To evaluate whether the app appears professional and trustworthy
3. To understand the extent to which users can successful create reminders for certain tasks (e.g., lock the door)
4. To compare the time it takes users to turn off the alarm when the button is green versus red.

## Review 9

The "Forget Me Not" app allows users to schedule important task
(e.g., "Lock the Door", "Turn off Stove"), and the app reminds users
to complete the task by sending a ring tone or vibration.

**Questions**

1. Draw a basic sketch of the "Forget me Not" app interface to illustrate various principles of visual design, including the Von Restoff Effect and Gestalt Principles (Proximity, Similarity, Closure, Continuity, Figure/Ground).
2. Why are colour choices and shape choices important in design?

## Review 10

The target user groups of the "Forget Me Not" app will mostly be
consisted of senior citizens.

**Questions**

1. How might your attitude and design approach be different if you are adopting _universal design_ versus _ability-based design_ as your guiding principle?
2. What is the difference between game and gamification? Describe one way you can gamify the app to motivate senior citizens to use it.
