# HRM 200 - Introduction to Human Resource Management

Term: Fall 2017  
Instructor: William Peckham

## Chapter 1, The Strategic Role of Human Resources Management

**Human Resources Management** (HRM)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; The management of people in organizations to drive successful organizational performance and achievement of organization's strategic goals.

**Human Capital**  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; The knowledge, education, training, skills, and expertise of an organization's workforce.

@import "Assets/figure-1.1.png"

### A Brief History of HRM

**Scientific Management**  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Concern for production.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Scientifically analyzing manufacturing processes to reduce costs and compensating employees based on performance.

**Human Resources Movement**  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Concern for people and productivity.

### Human Resources Movement: Evolutionary Phases

Phase 1 - early 1900s

- Personnel adminstration
- Hiring, firing, payroll/benefits processing

Phase 2 - 1930s to 1950s

- Union Liaison, compliance with new laws
- Orientation, performance appraisal, employee relations

Phase 3 - 1960s to 1980s

- Human resources management
- Outsourcing of many administrative functions
- Emphasis on contribution and proactive management of people

Phase 4 - 1990s to present

- Every line manager must possess basic HR skills
- Help achieve strategic objectives
- New roles: activist, change steward, talent manager/organizational designer, operational executor and business ally
- "HR Business Partner"

### Reorganization the HRM Function

#### Evidence-based HRM

- Using best available evidence in making decisions about HR practices.  
- Actual measurements, existing data, research studies.

#### Measuring the Value of HR: Metrics

Traditional measures focused on activity and cost.  
Examples: number of candidates interviewed, cost per hire.

Today's measures focus on productivity, quality, sales, market share, and profits (business operations).  
Examples: turnover/retention, employee performance, engagement scores, time-to-fill, etc.  
_Balanced scorecard_: a measurement system that translates organization's strategy into a comprehensive set of financial and operational performance measures.

### Growing Professionalism in HRM

**Characteristics of a profession**:

- A common body of knowledge
- Performance standards
- Professional association
- External perception as a professional
- Code of ethics
- Required training credentials
- Ongoing skill development
- Maintenance of professional competence

@import "Assets/figure-1.3.png"
@import "Assets/figure-1.4.png"
@import "Assets/table-1.2.png"

### Environmental Influences on HRM

| External Influences | Internal Influences |
| --- | --- |
| Economic conditions | Organizational culture |
| Labour market issues | Organizational climate |
| Technology | Management practices |
| Government |
| Globalization |
| Environmental concerns |

#### External Influences

##### Economic Conditions

Employment levels.  
Productivity levels.  
Growth of the primary, secondary, and tertiary (service) sectors.

##### Labour Market Issues

Increasing workforce diversity: visible and ethnic minorities; women; Aboriginal population; people with disabilities.

Generational differences:

- Traditionalists (pre-1946)
- Baby Boomers (1946 to 1964)
- Generation X (1965 to 1980)
- Generation Y (1981 to 2000)
- Generation Z (2000s+)

@import "Assets/table-1.4.png"

Higher overall level of education, however higher level of functional illiteracy.

Increased non-standard or contingent workers,

- Part-time
- Term/Temporary/Standby
- Home
- Self-employed

##### Technology

New technologies: Twitter, Facebook, videoconferencing.

Concerns over data control, accuracy, right to privacy, and ethics.

Computerized monitoring of e-mail, voice mail, telephone conversations, computer usage, and behaviour.

##### Government

Ensure policies and practices comply with new and changing laws covering:

- Human rights
- Employment standards
- Labour relations
- Occupational health and safety
- Workers' compensation

##### Globalization

Global trends:

- Firms extend business operations abroad
- Emergence of a single global market
- Increased international competition
- Multinational corporations: conduct business around the world, seek cheap skilled labour

HR professionals must become familiar with employment legislation in other countries and manage ethical dilemmas.

##### Environmental Concerns

- Sustainability
- Climate change
- Global warming
- Pollution
- Carbon footprints
- Extinction of wildlife species
- Ecosystem fragility

#### Internal Influences

##### Organizational Culture

Core values, beliefs and assumptions.  
Often conveyed through an organization's mission statement.  
Positive culture is desired.

Facebook's Core Values:

1. Be Bold
2. Focus on Impact
3. Move Fast
4. Be Open
5. Build Social Value

##### Organizational Climate

Prevailing atmosphere in an organization.  
Friendly/Unfriendly, open/secretive, rigid/flexible, innovative/stagnant, competitive/team-oriented.  
Influenced by leadership, HR polices, communication style.

##### Management Practices

Bureaucratic organizations being replaced with flatter structures.  
Increased employee empowerment.

### The Future of HR

3.1 billion workers, out of 6.1 billion population.  
31 million people in the UK workforce.  
93% growth comes from worker by 2016.  
66.8% Internet users use social network.  
35% of hourly employees still use timecards.  
UK workers collectively take 240 million sick days per year.  
30% of the employers have fired employees for surfing the web, but those who surf the web are 9% more productive than those who don't.

## Chapter 2, The Changing Local Emphasis

### Legal Framework for Employment in Canada

```text
  Employer:                       Employee:
    Right to modify                 Right to be protected
    employee work terms             from harmful business
    for legitimate                  practices
    business needs                    |
        |____________     ____________|
                    |     |
                  Government:
                    Balance needs of
                    employer and employee
```

### Jurisdiction

- Federal Laws
	- Federally regulated employers (federal civil service, Crown corporations and agencies, transportation, banking and communications)
- Provincial/Territorial employment laws
	- All other employers (90% of Canadian workers)

### Hierarchy of Employment Legislation in Canada

- Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
	- Basic rights
- Human Rights Legislation
	- Protection from discrimination
- Employment Standards Legislation
	- Minimum terms and conditions of employment
- Ordinary Laws
	- Content or context specific
- Labour Relations Act (Collective Bargaining Agreement)
- Employment Contract

### Tort Law

Primarily judge-based law.  
Precedent and jurisprudence set by one judge through his or her assessment of a case.  
Establishes how similar cases will be interpreted.

### Legislation Protecting the General Population

- Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
	- Freedoms:
		- Conscience and religion
		- Thought, belief, expression and opinion
		- Peaceful assembly
		- Association
	- Section 15 - Equality Rights
		- Right to equal protection and benefit of the law without discrimination
- Human Rights Legislation
	- Jurisdictions specific legislation
	- Prohibits intentional and unintentional discrimination in employment situations
		- Also in the delivery of goods and services

**Defn.** (Discrimination)  
"... a distinction, exclusion or preference based on one of the prohibited grounds that has the effect of nullifying or impairing the right of a person to full and equal recognition and exercise of his or her human rights and freedoms."

@import "Assets/figure-2.3.png"

**Defn.** (Intentional Discrimination)  
&nbsp; &nbsp; Direct  
&nbsp; &nbsp; Differential or unequal treatment  
&nbsp; &nbsp; Indirect (3<sup>rd</sup>) party)  
&nbsp; &nbsp; By association

**Defn.** (Unintentional Discrimination)  
&nbsp; &nbsp; _Constructive_ or _systemic_ discrimination  
&nbsp; &nbsp; Embedded in policies with adverse impact on specific groups

@import "Assets/figure-2.4.png"

#### Bona Fide Occupational Requirement (BFOR)

Justifiable reason for discrimination.  
Based on business necessity (safe and efficient operations), e.g. vision standards for bus driver.

#### Reasonable Accommodation

Requirement for Reasonable Accommodation

- Adjustment of employment policies/practices so that no individual is denied benefits of is disadvantaged
- Based on prohibited grounds in human rights legislation
- e.g. work station redesign for wheelchair

Undue Hardship

- Financial costs make accommodation impossible

#### Disability

- Basis determined by courts
	- Differential treatment
	- Enumerated ground (protected by legislation)
	- Substantive sense (is burden imposed or benefit withheld?)
- Accommodation
	- Respect dignity
	- Discrimination must be legally defensible
	- Most appropriate accommodation should be undertaken

@import "Assets/figure-2.6.png"

#### Harassment

"_Unwelcome behaviour that demeans, humiliates or embarrasses a person and that a reasonable person should have known would be unwelcome_."

@import "Assets/figure-2.7.png"

Employment Responsibility

- Protect employees from harassment
- Includes harassment by clients or customers

##### Sexual Harassment

"_Offensive or humiliating behaviour that is related to a person's sex, as well as behaviour of a sexual nature that creates an intimidating, unwelcome, hostile, or offensive work environment or that could reasonably be thought to put sexual conditions on a person’s job or employment opportunities_."

**Defn.** (Sexual Coercion)  
"_Harassment of a sexual nature that results in some direct consequence to the worker's employment status or some gain in or loss of tangible job benefits_."

**Defn.** (Sexual Annoyance)  
"_Sexually related conduct that is hostile, intimidating, or offensive to the employee but has no direct link to tangible job benefits or loss thereof_."

##### New Policies

**Bill 132, Sexual Violence and Harassment Action Plan Act (supporting Survivors and Challenging Sexual Violence and Harassment) 2016**  
Enforced in 2016.

##### Harassment Policies

Employers should, to reduce liability:

- Establish sound harassment policies
- Communicate policies to all employees
- Enforce policies in a fair and consistent manner
- Take an active role in maintaining a working environment that is free of harassment

Elements of an effective harassment policy:

1. A clear workplace anti-harassment policy statement
2. Information for victims (definitions, examples)
3. Employees' rights and responsibilities
4. Employers' and managers' responsibilities
5. Anti-harassment policy procedures
6. Penalities for retaliation against a complainant
7. Guidelines for appeals
8. Other options such as union grievance procedures and human rights complaints
9. How the policy will be monitored and adjusted

##### Enforcement of Harassment

- Responsibility lies with human rights commission in each jurisdiction
- Costs are borne by the commission
- Human rights tribunal resolves conflict through mediation
- Remedies:
	- Systemic
	- Restitutional

### Legislation Specific to the Workplace

#### Employment Equity Act

Based on Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  
Applies to federally regulated employers only.  
Promotes equality, removes employment barriers.  
Four designed groups:

1. Women
	- under-representation in certain fields
	- glass ceiling
2. Visible minorities
	- under-employed
3. Persons with disabilities
	- under-representation in all areas
	- lower pay
4. Aboriginal people
	- concentration in low skill, low pay jobs

@import "Assets/figure-2.10.png"

### Employment/Labour Standards Legislation

#### Employment Standards Act (ESA)

- Federal and provincial/territorial versions
- Establish minimum terms for:
	- Wages, overtime pay
	- Paid holidays and vacations
	- Maternity/Paternity leave
	- Bereavement/Compassionate care leave
	- Termination notice
- Employment contracts may exceed minimums
- Principle of greater benefit applies

##### Enforcement of Employment Standards Act

Complaints filled with ministry of labour or counterpart.  
Filed complaint is settled through the ministry, not civil court.  
Limitation periods for filing.  
Maximum claim limit for unpaid wages - this has changed.

#### Bill 148, Fair Workplaces, Better Jobs Act, 2017

Overview of Changes

- Minimum wage, $\$11.60 \rightarrow \$14.00~(2018)$
- Equal pay of equal work, temp/part-time = full-time
- Scheduling, on-call EEs receive 3 hours pay
- Vacation increases, 3 weeks vacation (6%) after 5 years
- Holiday pay, new formula (regular wages / days)
- Statutory leaves
	- Lots of changes (personal emergency, domestic violence, etc.)
	- Parental leave increased by 26 weeks, totaling 61 weeks or 63 weeks (for those who did not take pregnancy leave)

### Respecting Employee Privacy

#### Challenges

Employer has right to prevent liability to the company

- Eliminate time wasted on personal matters
- Prevent abuse of company resources

Employees have right to:

- Control over information about themselves
- Freedom from interference in their personal life

#### Internet and Email Usage Policy

Electronic surveillance is permitted.  
Employer should create written policy.  
Policy should be updated regularly to stay current with technology.

#### Video Surveillance

Used to prevent employee theft and vandalism.  
Employees must be made aware.  
Not advised if reasonable alternatives exist.

## Chapter 3, Human Resources Management & Technology

## Chapter 4, Designing & Analyzing Jobs

### Fundamentals of Job Analysis

**Defn.** (Job Analysis)  
"_A process by which information about jobs is systematically gathered and organized_."

**Defn.** (Job)  
A group of related activities/duties for one or more employees.

**Defn.** (Position)  
The collection of tasks/responsibilities performed by one person.

@import "Assets/figure-4.1.png"

### Steps in Job Analysis

1. Review relevant background information
2. Select jobs to be analyzed
3. Collect data on job activities
4. Verify/Modify data if required
5. Write job descriptions and job specifications
6. Communicate and update information as needed

#### 1: Review Relevant Background Information

Organizational Structure

- The formal relationships among jobs in an organization
- Should be appropriate given strategic goals

Organization Chart

- Clarifies chain of command; who reports to whom
- Does not explain communication patterns, degree of supervision, power, authority, or specific duties

@import "Assets/figure-4.2.png"

#### 2: Select Jobs to be Analyzed

Necessary when there are a number of similar jobs.

**Defn** (Job Design)  
The process of systematically organizing work into tasks that are required to perform a specific job.

@import "Assets/figure-4.3.png"
@import "Assets/figure-4.4.png"

##### The Evolution of Jobs and Job Design

Job Specialization (early-mid 1900s)

- Work simplification
- Industrial engineering

Behavioural Aspects (mid 1900s)

- Job enlargement, job rotation, job enrichment, team-based job design

Ergonomic Aspects (mid-late 1900s)

- Physical needs of workers

##### Competency-Based Job Analysis

Competencies: demonstrable characteristics that enable performance of a job.  
Shift from job-specific duties to competencies in a job descriptions; emphasis on employee capabilities.  
Examples of competencies:

- General (reading, writing, mathematics)
- Leadership (strategic thinking, motivating)
- Technical competencies for specific jobs

Use of competency analysis is becoming more common.  
It encourages workers to learn and rotate among jobs.  
More strategic approach to defining jobs.  
Supports performance management process.

#### 3: Collecting Job Analysis Information

Interviews (individual, group, supervisory).

Questionnaires.

Observations.

Participant diary/log.

National Occupation Classification (NOC).

@import "Assets/table-4.1.png"
@import "Assets/figure-4.5.png"

#### 4: Verifying Information

Verify with

- Workers currently performing the job
- Supervisors

Increases validity and reliability

- Inconsistencies/Concerns can be addressed
- Participants will be more honest

#### 5: Writing Job Descriptions and Job Specifications

##### Job Description

Statement of duties, responsibilities, reporting relationships, and working conditions of the job.

##### Job Specifications

Statement of requisite knowledge, skills, and abilities needed to perform the job.

- Answers the question "What human traits and experience are required to do this job?"
- All listed qualifications are bona fide occupational requirements (BFORs)
- Unjustifiably high educational/experience requirements may lead to systemic discrimination
- Qualifications of incumbents should not be confused with the minimum requirements.
- For entry-level jobs, identify actual physical and mental demands.

##### Job Identification

The job identification section generally contains several categories of information.  
The position title specifies the title of the job.  
The department and location are also indicated, along with the title of the immediate supervisor.

##### Job Summary

Describes the general nature of the job, listing only its major functions or activities.

##### Relationships

The jobholder's relationships with others inside and outside the organization

##### Duties and Responsibilities

Presents a detailed list of the job's major duties and responsibilities.

##### Authority

Define the limits of the jobholder's authority, including his or her decision-making authority, direct supervision of other employees, and budgetary limitations.

##### Performance Standards/Indicators

Some job descriptions contain a performance standards/indicators section, which indicates the standards the employee is expected to achieve in each of the job description's main duties and responsibilities.

##### Physical Demands Analysis

Identification of the senses used and the type, frequency, and amount of physical effort involved in a job.

##### Human Rights Legislation Considerations

- Not legally required but highly advisable.
- Essential job duties should be clearly identified.
- The only criteria examined should be knowledge, skills, and abilities required for the essential duties of the job.
- When an employee cannot perform an essential duty because of reasons related to a prohibited ground, reasonable accommodation to the point of undue hardship is required.

#### 6: Communication and Preparedness for Revisions

- Communicate to all relevant stakeholders
- Anticipate modifications
	- Restructuring
	- New product development
	- Technological changes
	- Competitors

@import "Assets/table-4.2.png"

## Chapter 5, Human Resource Planning

### Strategic Importance of HRP

**Defn.** (Human Resources Planning)  
Process of forecasting future human resources requirements to ensure that the organization will have the required number of employees with the necessary skills to meet its strategic objectives.

Helps organization to:

- Meet strategic goals and objectives
- Achieve economies in hiring new workers
- Make major market labour demands successfully
- Anticipate and avoid shortages and surpluses of human resources
- Control or reduce labour costs

@import "Assets/figure-5.1.png"

#### Relationship Between HRP and Strategic Planning

An HR plan does not occur independently of the other departments within an organization.

The HRP must align with the overall goals of the organization as well as both the long-term and short-term strategic plans set by the organization.

#### Importance of Environmental Scanning

External environmental factors monitored include:

- Economic conditions
- Market and competitive trends
- New or revised laws relating to HR
- Social concerns (health care, childcare, educational priorities)
- Technological changes
- Demographic trends

### Steps in the HRP Process

#### Step 1: Forecasting the Availability of Candidates (Supply)

Skills inventories and management inventories.  
Replacement charts and replacement summaries.  
Succession planning.  
Markov Analysis.

**Defn.** (Skills Inventories)  
Summary of current employees' education, experience, interests, and skills.  
Used to identify eligibility for transfer/promotion.

**Defn.** (Management Inventories)  
Summary of management employees qualifications, skills, interests, managerial responsibilities.  
Used to identify eligibility for transfer/promotion.

**Defn.** (Replacement Charts)  
Depicting of who will replace whom in the event of a job opening.  
Internal candidates age, present performance rating, and promotability status are listed.

**Defn.** (Replacement Summaries)  
Lists of likely replacements for each position.  
Indicates relative strengths/weaknesses, current position, performance, promotability, age, and experience.

**Defn.** (Succession Planning)  
Ensuring supply of successor for key jobs so that careers can be effectively planned and managed.  
Includes:

- Analysis of demand for managers and professionals
- Audit and projection of likely future supply
- Planning individual career paths, career counseling
- Accelerated promotions
- Planned strategic recruitment

**Defn.** (Markov Analysis)  
A method of forecasting internal labour supply that involves tracking the pattern of employee movements through various jobs and developing a transitional probability matrix.

@import "Assets/figure-5.3.png"

##### Forecasting Supply of External Candidates

Market conditions assessed:

- General economic conditions
	- Interest rates, wage rates, inflation, unemployment rates
- Labour market conditions
	- Demographics: education levels, age, gender, marital status
- Occupational market conditions
	- Relevant occupations (as applicable): e.g. engineers, skilled labour, accountants, etc.

#### Step 2: Forecasting Future HR Needs (Demand)

**Defn.** (Trend Analysis)  
Predict future needs based on past employment levels.

**Defn.** (Ratio Analysis)  
Ratio of business activity and number of employees needed, e.g. sales revenue per salesperson.

**Defn.** (Scatter Plot)  
Used to determined whether two factors (business activity and staffing levels) are related.

**Defn.** (Regression Analysis)  
Examines the statistical relationship between business activity and employees.

**Defn.** (Nominal Group Technique)  
Involves a group of experts meeting face to face.  
Steps include independent idea generation, clarification and open discussion, and private assessment.

**Defn.** (Delphi Technique)  
Judgmental forecasting method involving outside experts as well as organizational employees.  
Ideas are exchanged without face-to-face interaction and feedback is used to fine-tune until consensus is reached.

#### Step 3: Planning and Implementing HR Programs to Balance Supply and Demand

**Defn.** (Staffing Table)  
A pictorial representation of all jobs within the organization, along with the number of current incumbents and future employment requirements (monthly or yearly) for each.

@import "Assets/figure-5.5.png"

**Defn.** (Labour Surplus)  
The internal supply of employees exceeds the organization's forecasted demand.

**Defn.** (Labour Shortage)  
Internal supply of HR cannot meet the organization's needs.

**Defn.** (Labour Equilibrium)  
Rare, no new action, maintain existing transfer and recruitment plans.

##### Responding to a Labour Surplus

Hiring freeze/attrition.  
Early retirement buyout programs.  
Job sharing.  
Work sharing.  
Reduced workweek.  
Layoff ("temporary").  
Termination (can never return).  
Leave of absence.

Considerations:

- Survivor syndrome
- Supplemental unemployment benefits
- Severance package
- Pay
- Benefits
- Golden parachute
- Outplacement assistance

##### Responding to a Labour Shortage

Internal solutions:

- Transfer
- Promotion
- Employee retention

External solutions:

- Recruiting

## Chapter 6, Recruitment

### Strategic Importance of Recruitment

The process of searching out and attracting qualified job applicants, which begins with identification of a position that requires staffing and is completed when resumes and/or completed application forms are received from an adequate number of applicants.

**Defn.** (Recruiter)  
A specialist in recruitment, whose job it is to find and attract capable candidates.

#### Employer Branding

The image of an organization based on the benefits of being employed by that organization.  
Includes experiences a candidate goes through during the recruitment process, including:

- Experience when they go to the company's website
- Acknowledgement thanking candidate who sends in a resume
- Initial greeting by the receptionist
- Ability of the interviewer to articulate organization's values and culture

##### Three Steps

Define the target audience, where to find them, and what they want from an employer.

Develop the employee value proposition, and the reasons why the organization is a more attractive employer.

Communicate the brand by incorporating the value proposition into all recruitment efforts.

### The Recruitment Process

@import "Assets/figure-6.1.png"

### Developing and Using Application Forms

Most firms use a standard application form:

- Facilitates comparison of candidates
- Information that the company requires is specifically requested
- May be used as a sample of the candidate's own work
- Includes a written authorization for reference checking
- Includes acknowledge that the information provided is true and accurate
- Many application forms include an optional section regarding designated group member status

**Defn.** (Application Types)  
Biographical Information Blank (BIB), biographical data predictive of job success is scored, includes background, experiences, preferences.

**Defn.** (Online Applications)  
Reduce risk of lost applications.  
Increase exposure level of job and may reduce biases based on face-to-face meetings.

### Recruitment Avenues: Recruiting from Within the Organization

@import "Assets/figure-6.2.png"

**Defn.** (Human Capital Theory)  
The accumulation of firm-specific knowledge and experience involves a joint investment by both the employee and employer.  
Therefore, both parties benefit from maintaining a long-term relationship.

**Defn.** (Job Posting)  
Notifying current employees about vacant positions.

**Defn.** (Human Resources Records)  
Review of information on existing employees to identify candidates for openings.

**Defn.** (Skills Inventories)  
Review of qualification, interest skills of existing employees.

### Recruitment Avenues: Recruiting from Outside the Organization

#### Advantages

A larger pool of qualified candidates.  
Availability of a more diverse applicant pool.  
Acquisition of new skills, knowledge, and ideas.  
Elimination of employee rivalry and competition for transfers and promotions.  
Hiring individuals who already have necessary skills reduces training costs.

#### Planing External Recruitment

Considerations:

- Type of job affects recruitment method chosen
- Yield ratios - percentage of applicants that proceed to next stage of selection
- Time lapse data - time from start of recruitment to new employee starting work

@import "Assets/figure-6.3.png"

@import "Assets/figure-6.4.png"

- Employee referrals
- Former employees
- Educational institutions
- Open houses, job fairs
- Professional and trade associations
- Labour organizations
- Military personnel
- Online recruiting
- Human Resources and Skills Development Canada (HRSDC)
- Executive search firms
- Private search firms
- Private employment agencies
- Walk-ins and write-ins
- Online networking sites
- Print advertising

#### Recruiting Non-Permanent Staff

##### Temporary Help Agencies

Provide relief for employees who are ill, on vacation, taking a leave of absence, etc.  
Benefits:

- Cost less than permanent employees
- Immediate replacement of an unsuitable temporary worker
- Workers are often highly motivated

##### Contract Workers

Work directly for the employer.  
Specific type of work or period of time.  
Benefits:

- Coverage for seasonal or unplanned peaks in business
- Specialized work or projects
- Reduced layoffs during downturns

### Recruiting a More Diverse Workforce

#### Attracting Older Workers

Workers at or beyond retirement age.  
Typically have high job satisfaction, strong sense of loyalty and work ethic, good people skills.  
Considerations:

- Remove stereotypical attitudes
- Develop flexible work arrangements

#### Attracting Younger Employees

High energy, enthusiasm, physical strength.  
Considerations:

- Provide independence and work-life balance
- Give variety of experiences

#### Recruiting Designated Group Members

Assists in goal of employment equity.  
Considerations:

- Alternative publications for recruitment
- Liaise with agencies assisting designated groups
